docs: rewrite OPL as practical guide (#2588)
ory/docs: docs/keto/reference/ory-permission-language.mdx

---
id: ory-permission-language
title: Ory Permission Language
sidebar_label: Ory Permission Language
---

OPL is a TypeScript-based language for defining permission models in Ory Permissions.

## Namespaces

Each `class` in OPL defines a namespace — a type of object in your system, such as a file, folder, organization, or user.

```ts
class User implements Namespace {}
class Group implements Namespace {}
class File implements Namespace {}
```

Every class must implement `Namespace`.

## Relations

The `related` block defines who can be associated with an object. Each entry names a relation and declares what subject types it

> holds.

Reviewer: I think this can be confusing, as it is not necessarily clear what objects and subjects are here. I would either add something to namespaces section, or define object and subject here as the direction of relations.

Something along the lines:

```suggestion
The `related` block defines the relations between namespaces (classes). Each relation has a direction: `subject` is in `relation` of `object`. The relations defined in an OPL class (object) declare the allowed subjects. Generally, relations should represent the "real-world" relations between objects and subjects.
```

Then add something after the example saying which relations this defines and what the objects/subjects are.

```ts
import { Namespace } from "@ory/keto-namespace-types"

> class File implements Namespace {

Reviewer: class User missing

  related: {
    viewers: User[]
    owners: User[]
  }
}
```

Relations are always arrays because an object can have many subjects. This declaration allows creating relationships like:

```keto-natural
User:alice is in viewers of File:readme
User:bob is in owners of File:readme
```

### Multiple subject types

Use a union when a relation can hold subjects of different types:

```ts
viewers: (User | Group)[]
```

This allows writing tuples with either a `User` or a `Group` as the subject:

```keto-natural
User:alice is in viewers of File:readme
Group:engineering is in viewers of File:readme
```

> ### Subject-set references

Reviewer: I propose to completely omit this section, as subject sets are not really useful currently. There is no specific reason to use them, right?

Author: good point. Based on how we implement things, currently subjectsets are faster than traverse calls. In a place that traverse would cause 100 direct check calls, SubjectSet<> would make 1 call and get the answer.

But that's an implementation details, and technically, we **can** make optimizations to make them equally performant.

I think that's the only difference. Otherwise, Traverse is more future-proof as we can easily update/change the relationships form `.members.includes(.)` to `.admin.includes(.)`.

Author: Okay, see this answer: https://github.com/orgs/authzed/discussions/2851#discussioncomment-15608216

This is also one difference, though i don't think anyone would care about it.

Reviewer: I see, but the use-case is very narrow.
IMO the only relevant use-case is where the relation is dynamic, so the user can choose whether they want to grant permissions to all group members, only group admins, ... That requires the relation to not be in the OPL though, or allow narrowing it down to multiple relations. The use-case is not supported really rn.

Author: The final example makes use SubjectSets, and while changing it to avoid using SubjectSets, i had difficulty. I think there's still some value in mentioning this. Also, people can be migrating from a competitor to keto, and they have a working schema in their mind that uses SubjectSet.  I think it's worth mentioning this.

`SubjectSet<T, R>` refers to the subjects of relation `R` on namespace `T`. Use it when a relation can hold subjects from another
namespace's relation — for example, a group's members:

```ts
viewers: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members">)[]
```

This allows writing tuples that point to a group's members rather than a user directly:

```keto-natural
members of Group:engineering is in viewers of File:readme
```

> A subject can now be either a `User` directly, or any member of the `Group:engineering`.

Reviewer: Not clear to me what this means.

Author: i improved the wording as:
```
This means a viewer can be either a `User` directly, or any subject in the `members` relation of a `Group`. You can then write a tuple that grants access to a whole group at once:
```

## Permits

> The `permits` block defines boolean functions the engine evaluates during a check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `permits` block defines permissions. These are evaluated during a permission check request. Permissions are written as functions that return a boolean representing whether a permission is granted or not. While relations follow the real-world, permissions define application-specific rules based on relations.
```

```ts
class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: User[]
    owners: User[]
  }
  permits = {
    view: (ctx: Context) => this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject) || this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
    edit: (ctx: Context) => this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
  }
}
```

### Direct membership: `includes`

`this.related.x.includes(ctx.subject)` checks whether the subject is directly in relation `x`.

### Following subject-sets: `traverse`

> `this.related.x.traverse(g => ...)` iterates over the objects in relation `x` and evaluates the inner expression for each one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`this.related.x.traverse(g => ...)` iterates over the subjects in relation `x` and evaluates the inner expression for each one.
```

```ts
class Group implements Namespace {
  related: {
    members: User[]
  }
}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewerGroups: Group[]
  }
  permits = {
    view: (ctx: Context) => this.related.viewerGroups.traverse((g) => g.related.members.includes(ctx.subject)),
  }
}
```

`view` is granted if the subject is a member of any group in `viewerGroups`.

### Boolean operators

Combine checks with `||`, `&&`, and `!`:

```ts
view: (ctx: Context) =>
  this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject) ||
  this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),

restricted: (ctx: Context) =>
  this.related.allowlist.includes(ctx.subject) &&
  !this.related.blocklist.includes(ctx.subject),
```

### Calling another permission

A permission can call another permission defined on the same namespace:

```ts
edit:  (ctx: Context) => this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),

> admin: (ctx: Context) => this.permits.edit(ctx) && this.related.admins.includes(ctx.subject),

Reviewer: I think the example is not the most natural one
```suggestion
isAdmin: (ctx: Context) => this.related.admins.includes(ctx.subject),
edit:  (ctx: Context) => this.permits.isAdmin(ctx) ||this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
```

```

## Complete example

```ts

> class User implements Namespace {}
> 
> class Group implements Namespace {
>   related: {
>     members: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members">)[]
>   }

Reviewer: While the subject set works, I don't think it is the correct way of doing this. Having the parents explicitly here makes it a lot clearer and allows the relation to be reused in different permissions if one wants to add them (think admins of groups, ...)

```suggestion
  related: {
    members: User[]
    parents: Group[]
  }
  permits = {
    isMember: (ctx: Context) => this.related.members.includes(ctx.subject) || this.related.parents.traverse((parent) => parent.permits.isMember(ctx))
```

Reviewer: I admit that it is not so nice in the other namespaces without the planned type assertions, but I think it is the better way of writing permissions.

Author: moving to separate User and Group relations, this cascades to other namespaces as well; now we can't do:
```
class Folder implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members">)[]
  }
```

instead we have to do:
```
userViewers: User[]
groupViewers: Group[]
```

and have a permit that does the OR logic. same goes for `File`, but more complex to read, bc it has `viewers` and `owners` relations, so it will become `viewerUsers`, `viewerGroups`, `ownerUsers`, `ownerGroups`.

We can remove the inheritance logic, and have simpler example to avoid this.

I guess this is "simplicity" that SubjectSets brings.

Reviewer: IMO that simplicity only comes from current limitations, not from an actually better approach. I'm a bit hesitant to prefer this (even if only for some time until we fix this), because people will use this now to write their OPL. Also, it might stick around for a lot longer when LLMs pick this up and recommend it, even when we later change this section. WDYT? Is it worth it to keep this?

Author: I updated it based on the text convo we had on slack, about the usefulness of subjectsets. it now says
```
For example, suppose a File can be shared with all members of a group, or just its admins:
```
for demostrating subjectsets

}

class Folder implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members">)[]
  }
  permits = {
    view: (ctx: Context) => this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject),
  }
}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    parents: Folder[]
    viewers: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members">)[]
    owners: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members">)[]
  }
  permits = {
    view: (ctx: Context) =>
      this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject) ||
      this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject) ||
      this.related.parents.traverse((p) => p.permits.view(ctx)),
    edit: (ctx: Context) => this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
  }
}
```

This schema models:

- Direct access via `viewers` and `owners`
- Group-based access via `SubjectSet<Group, "members">`

> - Inherited access from parent folders via `traverse`

Reviewer: Consider adding some of these details as comments, so it is more clear what you refer to. Consider adding more comments to the full example in general.

Author: done. this section is also removed

---
id: ory-permission-language
title: Ory Permission Language
sidebar_label: Ory Permission Language
---

Ory Permissions uses a relationship-based access control model (ReBAC): permissions are derived from the relationships between

> objects and subjects stored in the system. OPL is the TypeScript-based language you use to define those relationships and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
objects and subjects stored in the system. Ory Permission Language (OPL) is the TypeScript-based language you use to define those relationships and the
```

permission rules that use them to control access.

> You write OPL to define things like "who can view a file", "whether a group member inherits access", or "whether owning a folder

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You use OPL to define a schema that includes permissions like "who can view a file", "whether a group member inherits access", or "whether owning a folder
```

```ts
class User implements Namespace {}
class Group implements Namespace {}
class File implements Namespace {}
```

Every class must implement `Namespace`.

## Relations

In OPL, **object** refers to the thing being accessed (for example, a `File`), and **subject** refers to the entity requesting
access (for example, a `User`). Relations always run in one direction: a subject is in a relation _of_ an object. The `related`
block on a class (the object) declares which relations it can have and what subject types are allowed in each.

```ts
import { Namespace } from "@ory/keto-namespace-types"
class User implements Namespace {}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: User[]
    owners: User[]
  }
}
```

Relations are always arrays because an object can have many subjects. This declaration allows creating relationships like:

```keto-natural
User:alice is in viewers of File:readme
User:bob is in owners of File:readme
```

Here, `File:readme` is the object, `User:alice` and `User:bob` are the subjects, and `viewers` and `owners` are the relations.

### Multiple subject types

> Use a union when a relation can hold subjects of different types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a union type when a relation can hold subjects of different types:
```

```ts
viewers: (User | Group)[]
```

This allows writing tuples with either a `User` or a `Group` as the subject:

```keto-natural
User:alice is in viewers of File:readme
Group:engineering is in viewers of File:readme
```

### Subject-set references

Sometimes you want a relation to include not just individual subjects, but all members of another relation. `SubjectSet<T, R>`

> lets you do this — it refers to all subjects in relation `R` on namespace `T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you want a relation to include not just individual subjects, but all members of another relation. `SubjectSet<N, R>`
lets you do this — it refers to all subjects in relation `R` on namespace `N`.
```

---
id: ory-permission-language
title: Ory Permission Language
sidebar_label: Ory Permission Language
---

> Ory Permissions uses a relationship-based access control model (ReBAC): permissions are derived from the relationships between

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ory Keto (Permissions) uses a relationship-based access control model (ReBAC) in which permissions are derived from the relationships between
```

objects and subjects stored in the system. OPL is the TypeScript-based language you use to define those relationships and the
permission rules that use them to control access.

You write OPL to define things like "who can view a file", "whether a group member inherits access", or "whether owning a folder
grants access to its contents". The schema you define is evaluated by the Ory Permissions engine at check time.

## Namespaces

> Each `class` in OPL defines a namespace — a type of object in your system, such as a file, folder, organization, or user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In OPL, each `class` defines a namespace, which represents a type of object in your system, such as a file, folder, organization, or user.
```

```ts
class User implements Namespace {}
class Group implements Namespace {}
class File implements Namespace {}
```

Every class must implement `Namespace`.

## Relations

> In OPL, **object** refers to the thing being accessed (for example, a `File`), and **subject** refers to the entity requesting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In OPL, `object` refers to the thing being accessed (for example, a `File`), and `subject` refers to the entity requesting
```

access (for example, a `User`). Relations always run in one direction: a subject is in a relation _of_ an object. The `related`
block on a class (the object) declares which relations it can have and what subject types are allowed in each.

```ts
import { Namespace } from "@ory/keto-namespace-types"
class User implements Namespace {}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: User[]
    owners: User[]
  }
}
```

> Relations are always arrays because an object can have many subjects. This declaration allows creating relationships like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Relations are always arrays because an object can have many subjects. For example, `File:readme` is the object, `User:alice` and `User:bob` are the subjects, and `viewers` and `owners` are the relations.

```

```keto-natural
User:alice is in viewers of File:readme
User:bob is in owners of File:readme
```

> Here, `File:readme` is the object, `User:alice` and `User:bob` are the subjects, and `viewers` and `owners` are the relations.

Reviewer 2: Moved this line to above snippet. Delete here.

### Multiple subject types

Use union type when a relation can hold subjects of different types:

```ts
viewers: (User | Group)[]
```

> This allows writing tuples with either a `User` or a `Group` as the subject:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows writing relation tuples with either a `User` or a `Group` as the subject:
```

```keto-natural
User:alice is in viewers of File:readme
Group:engineering is in viewers of File:readme
```

### Subject-set references

`SubjectSet<N, R>` refers to all subjects in relation `R` on namespace `N`. It lets you use a specific relation of another
namespace as a subject in a relation tuple.

This is especially useful when you need to distinguish between different roles within the same namespace. For example, suppose a
`File` can be shared with all `members` of a group, or just its `admins`:

```ts
class Group implements Namespace {
  related: {
    members: User[]
    admins: User[]
  }
}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: (User | SubjectSet<Group, "members"> | SubjectSet<Group, "admins">)[]
  }
}
```

> When writing tuples, you specify exactly which relation of the group to use as the subject:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When writing relation tuples, you specify exactly which relation of the group to use as the subject:
```

```keto-natural
members of Group:engineering is in viewers of File:file1
admins of Group:engineering is in viewers of File:file2
```

`File:file1` is accessible to all members of the engineering group, while `File:file2` is only accessible to admins.

## Permits

> The `permits` block defines permissions — functions that return a boolean, evaluated when a permission check is made. While

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `permits` block defines permission functions, which return a boolean and are evaluated when a permission check is made. While
```

relations model real-world associations, permissions define application-specific rules built on top of them.

Each permission function receives a `Context` object as its argument. `ctx.subject` refers to the entity whose access is being

> checked — the same subject used in relation tuples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
checked, which is the same subject used in relation tuples.
```

```ts
class User implements Namespace {}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewers: User[]
    owners: User[]
  }
  permits = {
    view: (ctx: Context) => this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject) || this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
    edit: (ctx: Context) => this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
  }
}
```

To check membership within a permission function, OPL provides two methods: `includes` for direct membership, and `traverse` for
inherited membership through another relation.

> ### Direct membership: `includes`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Subject direct membership
```

`this.related.<relation>.includes(ctx.subject)` checks whether the subject is directly in relation `<relation>`.

> ### Inherited membership: `traverse`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Subject inherited membership
```

`this.related.<relation>.traverse(fn)` takes a function and calls it for each object in `<relation>`. It returns `true` if the
function returns `true` for any of them.

The function receives each object in the relation and can check either a relation (`g.related.<relation>.includes(...)`) or call
another permission (`g.permits.<permission>(ctx)`).

```ts
class Group implements Namespace {
  related: {
    members: User[]
  }
}

class File implements Namespace {
  related: {
    viewerGroups: Group[]
  }
  permits = {
    view: (ctx: Context) => this.related.viewerGroups.traverse((g) => g.related.members.includes(ctx.subject)),
  }
}
```

`view` is granted if the subject is a member of any group in `viewerGroups`.

> ### Boolean operators

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Combine boolean operators
```

Combine checks with `||`, `&&`, and `!`:

```ts
permits = {
  view: (ctx: Context) => this.related.viewers.includes(ctx.subject) || this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),

  restricted: (ctx: Context) => this.related.allowlist.includes(ctx.subject) && !this.related.blocklist.includes(ctx.subject),
}
```

> ### Calling another permission

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Call another permission
```

A permission can call another permission defined on the same namespace:

```ts
isAdmin: (ctx: Context) => this.related.admins.includes(ctx.subject),
edit:  (ctx: Context) => this.permits.isAdmin(ctx) || this.related.owners.includes(ctx.subject),
```

> ## Complete example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Complete example for a permissions schema model
```
